README.md, before:

# Skin Tone Classification 

This repository contains Python scripts for **skin segmentation**, **skin tone estimation**, and **dataset-level analysis** using the Individual Typology Angle (ITA).  
The code was developed and tested on the **VALLES dataset**.

<img src="assets/Screenshot 2026-02-07 192527.png" width="300">

## Important notes
- The segmentation algorithm assumes **black backgrounds** or **already segmented images**

## Skin tone estimation details
- Skin tone is estimated using **ITA computed from true CIE L\*a\*b\*** values
- Background pixels are excluded using intensity-based masking
- **Highlights and shadows are removed** by discarding extreme L\* values:
  - Only pixels between the **5th and 98th percentiles of L\*** are retained
- Additional robustness is achieved using **IQR-based outlier filtering** before computing final ITA statistics

## Scripts
- `segment.py` – YCrCb-based skin segmentation with morphological cleanup  
- `skintoneclass.py` – ITA computation, tone classification, CSV export, and visualization  
- `skin_tone_stat.py` – Dataset statistics and tone-based image organization  

## Output
- CSV files with ITA statistics and skin tone labels  
- Optional visualizations grouped by skin tone

Commit message:

Enhance README with skin tone estimation categories
Added categories for skin tone estimation based on ITA values.

README.md, after:

# Skin Tone Classification 

This repository contains Python scripts for **skin segmentation**, **skin tone estimation**, and **dataset-level analysis** using the Individual Typology Angle (ITA).  
The code was developed and tested on the **VALLES dataset**.

<img src="assets/Screenshot 2026-02-07 192527.png" width="300">

## Important notes
- The segmentation algorithm assumes **black backgrounds** or **already segmented images**

## Skin tone estimation details
- Skin tone is estimated using **ITA computed from true CIE L\*a\*b\*** values

The following categories are used:

- **Very light**: ITA > 55  
- **Light**: 41 < ITA ≤ 55  
- **Intermediate**: 28 < ITA ≤ 41  
- **Tan**: 10 < ITA ≤ 28  
- **Brown**: −30 < ITA ≤ 10  
- **Dark**: ITA ≤ −30

- Background pixels are excluded using intensity-based masking
- **Highlights and shadows are removed** by discarding extreme L\* values:
  - Only pixels between the **5th and 98th percentiles of L\*** are retained
- Additional robustness is achieved using **IQR-based outlier filtering** before computing final ITA statistics

## Scripts
- `segment.py` – YCrCb-based skin segmentation with morphological cleanup  
- `skintoneclass.py` – ITA computation, tone classification, CSV export, and visualization  
- `skin_tone_stat.py` – Dataset statistics and tone-based image organization  

## Output
- CSV files with ITA statistics and skin tone labels  
- Optional visualizations grouped by skin tone
